I’ve been working on implementing some metrics for player performance in cricket over the past few weeks, and realized that it might serve me well to explain what they are, why they’re useful, and what we can find for them. For context, I’ll be looking solely at men’s IPL data (sourced from CricSheet) and all of these stats are available on the Batting Collapse webapp that I’ve created. I got the idea for these metrics from Jarrod Kimber’s Good Areas. Let’s hop in!

First up are true batting stats: true average and true strike rate. True average takes a player’s average (runs scored per out) and compares it to the average of a top 6 batsman over every single match played by the given player. For example, if player X has played two matches at an average of 30, and top 6 batsmen in these two matches have scored 500 runs with 20 of them getting out, player X has a true average of (30/(500/20)-1)*100 = 20. This indicates that player X was 20% better than the average top 6 batsman in games that they played. True strike rate (runs scored per ball faced) operates on a similar methodology, but with runs per ball faced rather than runs per wicket.

That’s a long way to say that true stats measure how much better your stats were compared to your peers. This is important because doing so allows you to adjust for a variety of factors, albeit in a rough manner; most prominent among these are match conditions (pitch, stadium, weather) and when the game was played (players are generally more aggressive strikers now than in the past).

Press enter or click to view image in full size

A plot of true average against true strike rate for the top 25 run scorers over every single IPL season
Here, we have the top 25 IPL run scorers plotted by true average and true strike rate. I’ve also included their average position for reference (though the names cover this up), as players lower down the order have the freedom to score far quicker.

On the bottom right are our anchor openers, with a neutral-to-negative true strike rate but incredibly high true average. The gap between KL Rahul and the rest is perhaps surprising, although less so when you consider the fact that he hasn’t averaged below 30 over the past nine IPL seasons. Dhawan has been consistent but rarely incredible, while Kohli has been incredible but rarely consistent. Although these stats can’t provide a value judgment on the anchor role, they can reveal which players best embody it.

Three freaks of nature occupy the top right: AB De Villiers, David Warner, and Chris Gayle. These players are indisputably the greatest in IPL history, able to consistently contribute high-impact performances. To put this into perspective, De Villiers averaged nearly 40 and struck above 150 over his career; a player who posted these stats only last season would have been well above average. However, as strike rates north of 150 become more and more normalized, true strike rate shows us how far ahead of their time these players were.

We move on to the next portion of the plot, the top left. These are players who focus more on scoring quickly than staying in. Yusuf Pathan’s true strike rate was surprising to me — you don’t hear about him in the pantheon of IPL greats, but striking at 180 back in 2008 was no joke. The lack of players in this area of the chart is indicative of the fact that the finisher’s role is a relatively new one; players like Rinku Singh, Tim David, and even David Miller haven’t been around long enough to crack the run scoring charts (to go with the fact that middle order batsmen generally score more runs anyways). Over most of IPL history, the only truly specialized finishers have been West Indian allrounders, the same ones that twice won the T20 World Cup.

The bottom quadrant features IPL mainstays who either never quite clicked or have been very inconsistent. Rohit Sharma’s struggles in the IPL are well documented, as despite being the most successful player in IPL history, he hasn’t averaged above 35 since 2013. De Kock and Rahane have had excellent seasons in the recent past but have also been very inconsistent over their careers. Teams seem to have cottoned onto the fact that Manish Pandey has never had an elite season: even in his best stretch from 2017–2019, he had a true strike rate of -8. Dinesh Karthik’s story is more interesting — his overall stats are poor, but he reinvented himself into becoming the best finisher in the IPL with RCB. As this turnaround came so late in his career, however, it is not well reflected in this chart.

While these stats aren’t prescriptive, we now have a good sense of how past and present batsmen compare. Next are the bowling metrics, true economy and true bowling strike rate. Again, these are to economy (runs conceded per ball) and strike rate (wickets per ball) what true average is to average, but without enforcing a distinction between bowlers and part-timers.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

A plot of true economy against true bowling strike rate for the top 25 IPL bowlers by balls bowled
Like the previous plot, players are largely located on this plot by the role that they occupy. Fingerspinners are located in the bottom right, staying economical without taking too many wickets (in essence, the bowling equivalent of an anchor). Axar Patel, R. Ashwin, and Krunal Pandya are particularly good at building pressure in the middle overs. Legspinners (with the notable exception of Rashid Khan) take more wickets at a worse economy, with Chahal leading the pack. We can see on this chart why IPL franchises consider legspinners to be so valuable — as a group, they strike about as frequently as the pacers while being more economical. A point of note is that Chahal’s overall economy is half a point worse than Amit Mishra’s (7.84 vs 7.38) but with Chahal both playing most of his home games at the Chinnaswamy and being utilized more in recent seasons, his true economy is actually lower.

Intriguingly, Narine takes less wickets than average, which can be partially explained by the fact that players are now more likely to play him out on reputation, as well as his numerous changes in action. He was the best bowler by some distance from 2012–14 (sporting a true avg/sr of 31/37) but has shown a marked decline in wicket taking threat since, though he is still extremely economical. Rashid Khan’s stats bear out his reputation, but last season was extremely poor by his standards — are players finally figuring him out?

Pacers, too, cluster by role. Bumrah is in a class of his own, being one of the best IPL bowlers in all phases of the game. The death bowlers are in the top right, with the exception of Malinga, who was so good at the death that he has a claim to being the greatest pacer in IPL history. Powerplay operators like Boult and Bhuvneshwar Kumar have high true strike rates. Shami’s excellent true strike rate comes as a surprise considering that his numbers are significantly worse than those of Bumrah and Rashid Khan. He’s another underrated player who, despite his poor economy, should make any team as a powerplay bowler.

Comparing players across various eras is difficult, and true stats on their own are a very rudimentary way to do so. That being said, we can extract interesting conclusions from them that aren’t immediately obvious by looking at the raw numbers. In Part 2, I’ll use a variation of these stats to look at player performance over the past couple of years.